---
title: 'Inside the Fed’s secret liquidity stress tests'
date: 2020-08-17T12:00:00+02:00
categories: ['risk-net']
tags: ['regulation']
datum: ['2020', '202008']
description: 'Lobbyists and Quarles train sights on horizontal exams that can shape bank risk appetite'
---

{{< quote steelblue >}}_Lobbyists and Quarles train sights on horizontal exams that can shape bank risk appetite_{{< /quote >}}

On March 24, at the height of the Covid-19 market crisis, the US Federal Reserve quietly shelved confidential liquidity reviews and stress tests for the largest banks as part of a raft of measures intended to ease operational burdens.

Horizontal liquidity stress tests were among the planned exams deemed “non-critical”, Risk.net learned, and ultimately deferred until June 15.

The suspension unnerved some former regulators. Tim Clark, former deputy director of regulation and supervision at the Fed until 2017 and a key architect of US liquidity stress-testing, says any hiatus in exam work will impair the Fed’s oversight of systemic risk. “It’s as important now as it’s ever going to be,” he says.

The liquidity stress tests are among a range of measures designed to keep banks operating during crisis events. But after the Fed released a $3 trillion tidal wave of cash into the financial system over three months to June, its unfinished liquidity regime has come under renewed scrutiny.

“Liquidity is a critical issue,” says Clark, who is now an adviser to the public interest group Better Markets. “The good news is we were better prepared for [the Covid crisis]. The less good news is that the Fed still had to take huge actions to keep the markets functioning from a liquidity standpoint.”

The injection follows another unprecedented move by the Fed last year to calm jitters in the repo market by [unleashing billions](https://www.risk.net/investing/markets/7133276/all-clear-structural-shifts-add-to-repo-madness) in overnight money in response to a sudden spike in borrowing rates.

The episode led to questions from lawmakers in Congress. In a hearing of the House Financial Services Committee on December 4, 2019, the Fed vice chair for supervision Randal Quarles highlighted supervisory practices as one of the factors that may have contributed to the overnight repo market volatility.

“They were probably not the decisive contributors, but they were contributors, and I think we need to examine them,” Quarles told Congress.

This came after comments from JP Morgan chief executive Jamie Dimon who said liquidity stress-testing requirements had reduced the amount of cash the bank was willing to commit to the repo market at that time.

Yet the horizontal programme is an object of mystery to all but a few bank insiders and regulators. The tests are subject to souped-up confidentiality laws that limit access to a tight need-to-know list. The laws are so strict that on July 24, the Fed made a legal [tweak](https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20200724a.htm) just to allow firms to disclose information to their staff, auditors, outside legal counsel, or other federal or state banking regulators.

Risk.net has interviewed four former liquidity supervisors and a treasurer of a large US bank with direct experience of the test process. The conversations give previously undisclosed details on the nature of the horizontal stress test and how banks conduct it.

Their insight shows how banks develop the scenarios used to stress liquidity provision, the way that regulators assess these efforts and deliver their verdicts, and the impact of the test on banks’ operations.

The Federal Reserve did not comment on the horizontal stress tests and reviews.

### All CLAR?

By design, US liquidity supervision can exert a stronger hold on banks’ liquidity practices than the Basel liquidity coverage ratio, which acts as a hard backstop. The horizontal exams enable supervisors to stress and assess banks’ risk management systems and processes to identify gaps or weaknesses.

The tests are widely known as the Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review, or CLAR – although the US regulator no longer formally uses this term.

“The CLAR body of work is looking to ensure that banks have the right types of flexibilities and contingencies, such as contingency funding planning,” says Katheryn Van der Celen, director at the Promontory Financial Group consultancy and former supervisor at the New York Fed.

It is also designed to identify [gaming](https://www.risk.net/regulation/6989811/how-banks-game-stress-tests-the-shocking-truth) of the Basel prudential ratios, says a former senior Fed liquidity official. The liquidity coverage ratio is based on a set of fixed assumptions about the cashflows generated by certain types of assets and liabilities.

“You need to be able to monitor the activities banks are engaging in that reduce what the liquidity coverage ratio measures as liquidity risk,” says the former Fed official.

Introduced in 2012, the exams are termed ‘horizontal’ because they are conducted across the eight systemically important US banks. The Fed uses the results to establish a broad picture of liquidity risk management at the country’s largest lenders. The exams are intended to probe banks’ own internal stress-testing efforts, and ensure they meet the required standard.

As the treasurer at one of the systemic US banks puts it: “CLAR is not a thing, it is a process. You should think of CLAR as a collective noun for the Fed’s annual programme of review of everything that we do, which manages liquidity and quantifies and measures liquidity risk.”

The horizontal exams are staffed by a group of liquidity risk experts and testing occurs through a year-long cycle that is split into two half-year testing periods.

In a year’s cycle, firms can expect to receive four to six exams focusing on specific topics. These quantitative and qualitative tests could range from modelling how banks earn revenues from their high-quality liquid assets in a stress scenario, to prime brokerage management, second line of risk defence, or internal auditing.

Typically, in each half-year, banks can expect to receive one quantitative and one qualitative test. But supervisors have the flexibility to tailor the schedule to respond to significant economic or market events and to defer less urgent planned topics – as happened in March.

“Absent those very topical and important things that come up from time to time, they will have their slate of topics that they’ll get to more on a cycle-based approach. But if you look at the exam calendar for the next 12 months, you probably have one or two on there that you say these are mission critical, we need to get done,” says Mark House, partner at consultancy Chain Bridge and a former Fed programme manager for CLAR.

Within the banks, the horizontal reviews are primarily handled by treasury and risk management staff but can also involve internal audit and, depending on the topic of the review, the leads of specific business functions.

### Stressed in three ways

The quantitative tests assess how much liquidity risk a firm is exposed to during periods of stress. The tests use three stress scenarios: a market-based scenario which features a market shock; an idiosyncratic scenario which stresses individual banks’ most significant exposures; and a combined scenario which features aspects of both.

The Fed examines how banks use internal stress tests to gauge liquidity in a business or activity, and how firms measure their risk profile across each of those three scenarios.

The regulator does not hand banks a set of off-the-shelf scenarios. Rather, banks design their own scenarios within broad guidelines issued by the Fed in Regulation YY enhanced prudential standards, as well as a 2010 [policy statement](https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/srletters/2010/sr1006.htm) on funding and liquidity risk management.

“The pen, so to speak, is in the hands of the bank to develop the narrative and the details of the scenario as well as the underlying methodology, which ultimately drive the results,” says House. “When evaluating individual methodologies the Federal Reserve will consider, is this a credible stress test to parse out the key risk and stress them in a meaningfully conservative way.”

The Treasurer agrees: “They are far more focused on our capabilities and inspecting the process that we have, rather than giving us a scenario and telling us to work on it.”

The market-based scenario generally contains some of the same macroeconomic factors used in the capital stress tests, says Van der Celen. This enables the capital and liquidity frameworks to have consistency.

The qualitative reviews focus primarily on risk management policies and procedures. Topics might include contingency funding plans, where the Fed would assess the alternative funding lines that banks could fall back on if they lose access to a source of funds.

Alternatively, the Fed might review banks’ reporting procedures for monitoring liquidity risks. This could involve analysing how firms source data for reporting liquidity risk metrics and their controls to ensure the data is accurate. The examiners may also review how the reporting is disseminated to management, and whether decision makers are receiving the information required to make informed decisions.

The overall process is described by the bank treasurer as “very intense”, with regular calls and meetings between bank staff and supervisors over a compressed period (see box: Taking the test).

### Assessing results

Results are typically issued via confidential feedback letters to banks once or twice a year, giving a readout or a grade on their performance in the exam and detail on their progress in meeting the requirements of the regulation.

If credit risk modelling, with decades of data on default rates and credit losses, is a science, liquidity stress modelling is an art. The process is more qualitative than quantitative, says House, and assessments require an element of judgement.

Firms receive guidance on “the range of the quantity of liquidity they have to hold, whether it’s their liquidity coverage ratio stress test or their internal liquidity stress test”, says Van der Celen.

Negative feedback is delivered through Matters Requiring Attention (MRAs) or Matters Requiring Immediate Attention (MRIAs). For example, a firm may have underweighted a given risk driver in its internal liquidity stress test, casting doubt on the adequacy of its protections against that risk. In this case, the Fed may issue a notice outlining the deficiency with directives to fix it.

How long remediation takes depends on the seriousness of the issues found. If the issue is not significant, the firm may be given a longer period of time, House says.

The Fed’s advice is not always a diktat, either. Sometimes the feedback is the starting point for a “constructive dialogue” between bank and regulator, says the treasurer. A bank may push back on a particular issue, pointing out certain mitigants and causing the Fed to reconsider.

The feedback can also have far-reaching implications for a bank’s business. An exam could identify that certain activities weren’t being appropriately captured in stress-testing – in other words, the Fed concludes that the liquidity risk was underestimated by the firm.

The resulting supervisory finding could cause a firm to hold more liquidity against a business, which could ultimately affect the economics of that area activity, depending on how substantial the Fed considered the underestimate to be.

House thinks that standardised measures like the liquidity coverage ratio establish a baseline cost of conducting many of the affected businesses and activities – for example, the amount of high-quality liquid assets a specific business line is absorbing.

But, he adds, the internal liquidity stress tests can more accurately measure the liquidity risk in a firm’s activities. This could lead to the firm determining that a business may be riskier than the liquidity coverage ratio suggests; perhaps too high to keep conducting in its current format.

### What’s in store?

The Fed announced the resumption of planned examinations on June 15. The former supervisor says they expect Fed staff to be formulating scenarios that better reflect the altered circumstances.

Van der Celen adds that it may translate to a lighter exam-load until the worst of the Covid-19 crisis is over: “They might reduce scope to reprioritise one or two issues or topics that are the most relevant in the current environment and support any shift in the supervisory focus on systemic concerns.”

Looking ahead, Vice Chair Quarles has confirmed that the Fed is continuing with a programme of reform aimed at increasing transparency and accountability in bank supervision, some of which will affect horizontal liquidity stress tests.

The first of these, the rule revising confidentiality procedures finalised on July 24, means firms will have scope to more widely share information relating to the tests – though investors will still be off-limits.

Bank lobby groups have long railed against the secretive nature of the liquidity supervision programme, in particular the Fed’s methodology and assessment criteria. In a comment letter on the proposed changes to the confidentiality rules, dated August 16, 2019, the Bank Policy Institute proposed the Fed make available general observations arising from exams, and horizontal reviews, in particular, to firms.

“Releasing this information in an anonymised manner would offer institutions meaningful opportunities to strengthen their own compliance programmes, reduce the potential for compliance violations and enhance risk management practices based on information that would otherwise be inaccessible,” the BPI suggested.

But the suggestion was not acted upon in the final amendment to the confidentiality rules.

Also relevant to horizontal reviews are proposed changes to the use of MRAs and MRIAs. The quantity of these requests and the speed at which they must be turned around has been a source of frustration for many banks, says the bank treasurer.

Vice Chair Quarles has [indicated](https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/quarles20200117a.htm) in January 2020 that he would like to see these withdrawn as tools for enforcing supervisory guidelines. Instead, he wants them to be used only in cases of specific violations of law or regulation by a bank. His proposal echoes lobbying by the American Bankers’ Association in late 2018, and by BPI chief Greg Baer in [testimony](https://bpi.com/press-releases/bpi-president-ceo-greg-baer-describes-opaque-subjective-and-unreviewable-examination-process-in-testimony-before-senate-banking-committee/) to the Senate Banking Committee in April 2019.

### Window of opportunity

In the longer term, how liquidity risk is regulated is likely to be a subject of intense debate. Prominent voices have argued that if liquidity regulation makes banks hold excessive amounts of capital or assets against liquidity shocks, then the downside is their lack of participation in financial markets at times of stress.

To this end, Quarles [proposed](https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/quarles20200206a.htm) in February that banks should assume they can access the [discount window](https://www.risk.net/regulation/7509336/bankers-say-discount-window-is-imperfect-fix-for-ust-woes) in the liquidity stress-testing process. This would allow them to hold smaller quantities of cash reserves at the Fed, and instead build up holdings of other high-quality liquid assets. Quarles explained: “We could… [allow] firms to rely on the [discount window](https://www.risk.net/regulation/7509336/bankers-say-discount-window-is-imperfect-fix-for-ust-woes) in their [internal stress-testing] as a means of monetising, for example, Treasury securities in their scenarios.”

Central to this debate is the extent to which bank liquidity should be resilient to extreme shocks like Covid-19, or whether regulation should factor in the role of a central bank as liquidity provider of last resort.

Data shows that Fed short-term liquidity lines are quickly repaid, so this is not a bailout in the sense of saving an insolvent bank. Primary credit to banks – essentially, the discount window – peaked at more than $49 billion in the first week of April 2020, and by early August was already back down to just $3.5 billion.

Even the strongest advocates of the post-crisis regulatory framework accept the liquidity rules may have had some unintended consequences.

Daniel Tarullo, former Federal Reserve governor until 2017 and a long-standing critic of subsequent efforts by President Donald Trump’s administration to roll back regulation, has talked about the need to move beyond regulations that simply encourage the hoarding of Fed reserves.

Addressing a Brookings Institute event in December 2019 on the role of regulation in the overnight repo market volatility, Tarullo said more attention should be paid to runnable wholesale funding used by non-banks. This could be a better alternative than piling up liquidity regulation on banks. His argument may gather fresh impetus after leveraged hedge funds were [identified](https://www.risk.net/derivatives/7505206/us-treasury-market-holds-its-breath-after-high-drama) as one of the factors fuelling a Treasury market liquidity squeeze in March 2020.

“Having every bank completely self-insure its liquidity needs even under severe stress or failure may make sense as a microprudential matter,” said Tarullo. “But if every bank must sit on its pool of readily usable liquidity in anticipation of possible failure, the result could in periods of stress be a decidedly suboptimal macroprudential policy that starves an already strained financial system of needed liquidity.”

### Taking the test

The bank treasurer says: “In December, we receive two topics and the regulator tells us they’re going to open the exam on January 15. On that date, we receive an incredibly long request for information with 40, 80, 150 line items of data requests.

“For the first two to four weeks, the Fed staff plough through that data, understanding and mapping our processes, and pulling out the line items of our particular capabilities that they want to go deeper on.

“They send their data line requests to us, and we send it back to them. Then they run their statistical sampling tools and they put out 80 or 100 items, and they ask for the source documentation.

“You’re having calls with them every 24 to 48 hours and sending them information, either the very next day or two days later. Those two to four weeks are very intense. We are an enormous organisation with tens of millions of customers, so the sample sizes are very big.

“As an example, in a recent exam their sample size was 770 customer accounts. So in 14 days they went from several tens of millions down to 770. And then they said you have 48 hours to find us the 770 underlying transaction data, whether it’s retail or trading book or corporate banking, here’s all the different data, customer documentation that we want.

“And we provide it to them. That requires enormous capability across the bank to have the people at the back end of the organisation, where they analyse data and produce analysis on risk measurement, to go to the frontline people who own know-your-customer and anti-money laundering data, account opening, transaction booking system of origin system of records.”

Editing by Alex Krohn

