---
title: 'A bridge too far: EBA swap stay to spur mass repapering?'
date: 2020-09-03T12:00:00+02:00
categories: ['risk-net']
tags: ['regulation']
datum: ['2020', '202009']
description: 'Industry scrambles to avoid duplicating BRRD close-out contract changes across four jurisdictions'
---

{{< quote steelblue >}}_Industry scrambles to avoid duplicating BRRD close-out contract changes across four jurisdictions_{{< /quote >}}

Painting Scotland’s Forth rail bridge is famously – or infamously – a never-ending job. No sooner is it done, than you have to start again from the other end.

It’s a scenario Europe’s largest banks are keen not to mimic. Five years ago, they repapered thousands of derivatives contracts with non-European counterparties to insert new clauses – known as contractual swap stays – to avoid unnecessary and messy close-outs. They may now have to rewrite these contracts again – and at the double – to comply with new stay rules being drafted by the European Banking Authority.

The clauses are needed to ensure that third-country counterparties entering derivatives contracts under their home law, will abide by EU orders – not to close out swaps trades for 48 hours after an EU bank counterparty goes into resolution. The clauses were inserted into contracts in the UK, France, Germany and Italy, at the behest of local regulators, to comply with the EU’s original Bank Resolution and Recovery Directive (BRRD), finalised in 2014.

The stays offer a window for European resolution authorities to carry out an orderly process without the major cash drain of large derivatives close-outs. Statutory swap stay powers already exist for EU resolution authorities, so trades entirely under EU law require no such amendment.

According to Knox McIlwain, a partner at the law firm Allen & Overy in London, some 2,000–3,000 counterparties have already gone through the amendment process with banks in these four, early adopter jurisdictions and are keen to avoid a repeat.

The EBA is now drafting a pan-European version of the swap stay clauses under Article 71a of the revised directive, known as BRRD II, which was agreed by lawmakers in 2019.

Article 71a requires an update to contractual swap stays to accommodate a big change contained in Article 33a of BRRD II – the concept of a pre-resolution stay. The earlier version of BRRD allowed regulators to impose the moratorium only when a bank had entered resolution.

The EBA’s regulatory technical standards (RTS) on Article 71a will supersede existing local requirements and could trigger another round of contract amendments with non-EU counterparties – the bulk of which are governed by New York law.

Some commentators are optimistic that another round of major contractual amendments can be avoided for countries where firms’ documentation already meets 71a’s objectives:

“We are hoping that there won’t be a material additional compliance burden,” says Ann Battle, assistant general counsel at the International Swaps and Derivatives Association.

But not all agree.

According to McIlwain, if the EBA sticks with its proposed approach, it is “pretty unlikely” the EBA would consider these existing swap stays to be compliant with the new RTS, forcing all those counterparties to go through the same process a second time.

One issue causing particular angst among lawyers is the EBA’s proposal for the stay clause to be governed by an EU nation’s law. This means New York law contracts will have to include this one specific clause governed by the law of an EU jurisdiction. Lawyers warn this so-called split-governing-law approach heightens the risk of litigation and could create other legal and operational headaches.

“There are clearly conflicts of law concerns and a heightened risk of litigation. A split governing law would introduce additional complexity to the financial contracts and may even trigger further legal opinion requirements to meet [netting opinion](https://www.risk.net/derivatives/2257761/legal-clouds-hang-over-rwa-driven-netting-push) obligations [under the EU’s Capital Requirements Regulation],” says Kelesi Blundell, a lawyer at Allen & Overy. “Potentially, it makes it impracticable for EU firms to get their counterparties to agree to these clauses, which will undo the whole purpose of the requirement.”

This industry is pushing for a 12 to 18-month phase-in period to allow time for any repapering exercise generated by the RTS, but one legal source at a global investment bank warns things could get “very messy” if EU authorities try to activate the new pre-resolution stay powers in the meantime.

And, of course, there’s an added Brexit complication: when the Brexit transition period ends on December 31, 2020, contracts between UK and EU banks will count as third-country transactions – for both sides – versus intra-EU trades.

Meanwhile, it’s intended that BRRD II be transposed into local law on December 28, 2020.

So the redrafted Article 71a clauses will need to be inserted on European trades with firms in third-country jurisdictions, such as the US or Japan, at the exact same moment that a large number of transactions between UK and EU entities also become subject to contractual swap stay rules for the first time.

But even without the workload around Brexit, the operational burdens created by Covid-19, and other big implementation projects such as [Libor transition](https://www.risk.net/derivatives/7652276/uks-tough-legacy-fix-spells-trouble-for-us-libor-transition), sources say the timeline of December 28 this year looks unfeasible to introduce new Article 71a contractual language.

### Splitting headache

The removal of the split governing law provision is a key objective for the industry response to the consultation. Existing contractual swap stays in the EU and beyond have simply consisted of an agreement to recognise any moratorium imposed by the home resolution authority.

“Contractual recognition to date has been achieved by recognising the stays as if the contract were governed by a different law, so we are hoping that as a technical matter, we will be able to address that issue through our comment and advocacy,” says Isda’s Battle.

That the stay clause must come under the governing law of an EU country is a complete departure from existing practice, but is not unprecedented in financial markets.

McIlwain notes there are a few such examples for split governing law. A UK bank issuing dollar-denominated hybrid capital instruments, for example, will do so under New York law. But the subordination clause itself will often be governed by English law – to align the contractual arrangements with the law governing the insolvency of the issuer.

“But we see that only in certain jurisdictional pairs, fairly limited transactions, known about in advance, and in highly developed financial law jurisdictions,” adds McIlwain.

By contrast, the EBA Article 71a proposal would affect all swaps, repurchase transactions and “other financial contracts” governed by a third-country legal framework.

“We don’t know in advance which of those jurisdictions have compatible split governing law frameworks, we haven’t had to due-diligence whether jurisdiction X will enforce a split governing law provision, whether that raises other issues on a cross-border basis,” says McIlwain. “The notion of just getting everyone to sign up for these agreements raises more questions – the EBA was trying to increase certainty by doing this, but I think they have actually increased uncertainty.”

### Stay, stay

Lobbyists are also pushing for a phase-in period of 12-18 months to accommodate any repapering exercise generated by the RTS. But adding a phase-in beyond December 2020 poses legal problems itself; it could leave a gap if EU resolution authorities try to activate swap stays at a failing bank in the meantime. Specifically, BRRD II added flexibility around the timing of a moratorium, which is not included in the existing contractual stays in the four jurisdictions.

The earlier version of BRRD allowed regulators to impose the moratorium only once a bank had entered resolution. Whereas, Article 33a of BRRD II introduced the concept of a [pre-resolution stay](https://www.risk.net/regulation/5626971/eu-parliaments-moratorium-plan-billed-recipe-for-bank-run) – for instance, as soon as a regulator declares a bank failing or likely to fail. Existing stay clauses only allow for a post-resolution moratorium, so the law will need updating in some way to integrate the Article 33a powers.

“Delaying the RTS entry into force will create a vacuum: the directive [BRRD II] and local transposition will require the inclusion of the contractual term, while there will be no technical standard to define the term,” says a spokesperson for EBA.

Industry sources agree that this is potentially a problem in the tail-risk scenario of a big derivatives dealer failing between December 2020 and the eventual entry into force of a delayed RTS. The legal source at the global investment bank says that if EU authorities tried to impose a pre-resolution swap stay, affected third-country counterparties could claim: “Your attempt to stop us enforcing our termination rights is in itself a breach of contract.” That could, the source warns, “be very messy from a litigious perspective.”

### Grandfathering?

The EBA spokesperson hints at the possibility that local transposition of Article 71a could lead to some form of grandfathering, pointing to paragraph 3, which specifies that the contractual stays requirement applies to: “Any financial contract which creates a new obligation, or materially amends an existing obligation after the entry into force of the provisions adopted at national level to transpose this Article.”

“It will be important to understand how this paragraph will be transposed in local legislation,” says the spokesperson. “Because this is what will define the perimeter for the financial contracts that will need to include the contractual term.”

But Allen & Overy’s McIlwain doubts paragraph 3 will be much help, because the vast majority of affected transactions will be covered by Isda or other master agreements. New or amended trades with an existing counterparty will take place under an existing master agreement, which will therefore need to be changed to incorporate Article 71a – exactly what the industry hopes to avoid.

For a bank to enter into new trades without amending the existing master agreement, “effectively you would need to create split netting sets and functionally run two contracts”, says McIlwain. The additional margin and capital requirements that would be generated by splitting master agreements into pre- and post-December 2020 makes this economically impractical.

### Same stay, different day

McIlwain suggests there are other ways in which national transposition for the four jurisdictions might enable reliance on contractual stays that have already been adopted. This could be done by tinkering with how Article 33a is transposed, rather than changing the exact wording of contractual stays under Article 71a. This is easiest in the UK (see box: UK swings and roundabouts).

In the three other European jurisdictions, McIlwain says, the counterparty generally agrees to be bound by stays by referencing specific articles of domestic law transposed from BRRD. Even here, he says, there is room for flexibility. If the member states follow the organisation of the BRRD II text and transpose the new stay by introducing a new article into domestic law that contractual stays must reference, then the current language in them would not work.

“But if the authorities transpose the [Article 33a] provision as an expansion of the current close-out suspension power – essentially making it part of one of the existing [domestic law] articles that is already enumerated in compliance language – then they too might be able to rely on existing compliance language and avoid redocumentation exercises,” says McIlwain.

However, this approach is unlikely to work if the EBA adopts a final RTS that is as prescriptive as its first draft, since member states would then need to transpose the exact mandatory requirements into domestic law.

Blundell points out that Article 33a doesn’t need to be treated as some kind of radical departure from the original version of swap stays already implemented in the four countries: “The new Article 33a stay simply looks at a different point in time, so it wouldn’t be outrageous to implement it as part of an existing stay that member states already have.”

### Timing is everything

The EBA’s consultation closed on August 15, following which it must draft a final recommendation for the European Commission. The EC will then need to adopt the final text and provide a three-month non-objection period for the European Parliament and Council of the European Union. This can only be shortened if both institutions agree to a shorter non-objection period. Some time, shortly after the non-objection period ends, the final text will be published in the official journal of the EU. It becomes binding 20 days after publication.

Only after the final wording becomes available and when BRRD II is fully implemented in each jurisdiction could Isda begin drafting industry standards to implement contractual changes. This typically requires 12–18 months of negotiations, according to Battle. Experience with previous rounds of mass contract changes – such as those related to implementation of existing stay regulations – demonstrates the need for detailed reassurances to help counterparties get on board with proposed amendments.

There’s the extra wrinkle that BRRD II is a directive, not a regulation, so the RTS does not automatically apply in local law. With the original BRRD Article 55 – a similar provision requiring non-EU counterparties to agree to recognise the bail-in of failed EU bank liabilities by the home resolution authorities – there were variations in the local transposition of the RTS. That means Isda may not be able to get to work until it has seen the precise wording for BRRD II adopted in each major EU jurisdiction.

Moreover, the fast-track non-objection process by co-legislators depends on the RTS not proving controversial with lawmakers. While the UK has left the EU, members of the council or parliament from the three remaining early adopter countries may raise objections if they conclude the EBA proposal is forcing banks in their jurisdictions into an unnecessary duplicate compliance exercise.

A spokesperson for German regulator Bafin tells Risk.net: “The EBA has, in our view, no power to provide for exceptions or similar provisions relating to the [existing] German regulation.” The regulator emphasises, however, that the draft RTS has not yet been finalised and the consultation process is still ongoing.

The French Autorité de Contrôle Prudentiel et de Résolution declined to comment for this article.

{{< quote steelblue >}}
### UK swings and roundabouts
The UK Prudential Regulation Authority has already instructed UK banks to amend derivatives contracts with EU firms to include contractual stay language in time for the end of 2020. But those banks might have to make an initial amendment in line with the existing UK contractual stay rules, then make a second set of changes to comply with the final Article 71a RTS if it is on-shored into local legislation. The UK has agreed to adopt any EU laws that come into effect before December 31, 2020.

Industry lobbyists are asking the UK Treasury to ensure these two changes are handled as one process, rather than forcing two rounds of contract amendments. But the legal source at the global investment bank thinks the Treasury should go further, especially in the case of existing third-country counterparties, such as those based in the US or Japan. In theory, even contracts between British banks and these non-European clients will need to be altered to reflect the fact that the domestic legal framework is now English rather than EU law.

“Why would they do that? You would expect them to say that the form of language that exists that was developed to reflect EU law will still be sufficient to ensure compliance with UK law post-January 1, 2021,” says a legal source at a global investment bank.

It could certainly create a crunch at the end of the year.

“The worst-case scenario at the moment is that UK firms will be asked to enter into two remediation exercises in a very compressed timeframe around Christmas and New Year,” says the legal source.

In theory, if the RTS adoption is delayed by just a few days beyond December 31, 2020, the UK would no longer be obliged to implement it under the Brexit Withdrawal Agreement – though they would still be bound by the main BRRD II legislative text, including pre-resolution swap stays.

In practice, even if the RTS is adopted on schedule, Allen & Overy’s McIlwain points out that the UK transposition could include a sunset clause that shuts it down after January 1, 2021, so banks never need to comply.

Furthermore, counterparties to English law swaps contracts agree to a moratorium on swaps close-outs by referencing the 2009 Banking Act’s crisis management measures. The 2009 Act could be amended to incorporate pre-resolution stays, thereby avoiding a mass repapering exercise.

“So long as HM Treasury transposes [Article 33a] in such a way that, under the Banking Act, it falls within the definition of a crisis management measure – actions you take to effect an orderly resolution – then the existing compliance language works, the existing PRA contractual swap stay rule fully covers the scope of that provision,” says McIlwain.

The Bank of England declined to comment for this article. The Treasury did not respond in time to a request for comment.

{{< /quote >}}
